docs: ADR 018 Network Upgrades (#1562)
celestiaorg/celestia-app: docs/architecture/adr-018-network-upgrades.md

# ADR 018: Network Upgrades

## Status

Proposed

## Changelog

- 2023/03/29: Initial draft
- 2023/08/29: Modified to reflect the proposed decision and the detailed design

## Context

There are three requirements in Celestia's upgrading mechanism that diverges from how the standard Cosmos SDK currently operates:

> - Upholding a stance of minimal on-chain governance and a preference towards off-chain governance or social consensus. Using the option of exit as a tool to ensure that those with explicit power (validators, perhaps) are held accountable with those of implicit power i.e. the wider community of users that benefit from Celestia

Reviewer: I guess I could rephrase these as goals rather than requirements (i.e. directions we're trying to head in rather than tangible requirements)

> One that acts as a forcing function for node operators to practice coordinating among themselves.

Doesn't signalling automate this coordination aspect.

> We will be well versed in picking our own source of truth

The good this with token voting is that there is a medium with which all delegators can state their preference/decision. With social consensus, it can sometimes be not so clear what _everyones_ preferences are

- Minimal downtime. As a core piece of infrastructure that the rollup community depends on, Celestia needs to be highly available. This means reducing the downtime for upgrades through effective coordination and minimal migrations.

> - Full chain backwards compatibility. The latest software version should be able to correctly process all transactions of the chain since genesis.

Reviewer 2: I think it meant to be
```
to correctly process all transactions of the chain since genesis in accordance with the version of the app that was in use at the time of each transaction's block.
```

> - Full chain backwards compatibility. The latest software version should be able to correctly process all transactions of the chain since genesis.

Reviewer: Yup I will extend this

- **Signaled**: The upgrade height could also be signaled in protocol. This would involve each validator using some signaling mechanism to indicate that they are ready to upgrade. After some threshold has signaled that an upgrade will occur, then the upgrade height is determined. Unlike the hardcoded approach, signaling does not risk halting the network, but it moves the decision to upgrade closer to the validators. Even if social consensus is reached, it's possible for the validators to simply never signal that they are ready to upgrade. As discussed above, to mitigate this risk, some halt height could be added.

## Decision

The following decisions have been made:

> 1. All upgrades (barring social hard forks) are to be rolling upgrades. That is node operators will be able to restart their node ahead of the upgrade height. The node will continue running the current version of the upgrade but will be capable of validating and executing transactions of the version being upgraded to. This makes sense given the decision to have single binary syncs (i.e. support for all prior versions). As validators are likely to be running nodes all around the world, it reduces the burden of coordinating a single time for all operators to be online. It also reduces the likelihood of failed upgrade and automates the process meaning generally less downtime between versions.

Reviewer 2: > That is node operators will be able to restart their node ahead of the upgrade height.

[question] This means there will be a period of unavailability for that node while shutting down the old node with the old binary and starting a node with the new binary? but since nodes are likely to do so at different times, the whole network wont go down at the same time.

Reviewer: Yes. This is the idea. Hopefully this means that the actual transition to the new app version happens seamlessly

> 1. All upgrades (barring social hard forks) are to be rolling upgrades. That is node operators will be able to restart their node ahead of the upgrade height. The node will continue running the current version of the upgrade but will be capable of validating and executing transactions of the version being upgraded to. This makes sense given the decision to have single binary syncs (i.e. support for all prior versions). As validators are likely to be running nodes all around the world, it reduces the burden of coordinating a single time for all operators to be online. It also reduces the likelihood of failed upgrade and automates the process meaning generally less downtime between versions.

Reviewer: Yes exactly

> 2. Upgrade coordination will be rolled out in two phases. The first (v1 -> v2) will rely on a configured height to move from one version to the next. The binary will be released with a default height which can be modified later by validators in the event that it needs to be pushed back (or forward). The second phase (v2 -> v3) will use a signalling mechanism whereby validators who are now running on the latest binary will signal that they are ready to shift to the next version.

Reviewer: You're basically saying that it's easier to cut a new release with the new height then to get validators to manually change the default height in their config?

> 2. Upgrade coordination will be rolled out in two phases. The first (v1 -> v2) will rely on a configured height to move from one version to the next. The binary will be released with a default height which can be modified later by validators in the event that it needs to be pushed back (or forward). The second phase (v2 -> v3) will use a signalling mechanism whereby validators who are now running on the latest binary will signal that they are ready to shift to the next version.

Reviewer: Keep in mind every single time we'd cut a new release with a different height would constitute a breaking change and a major bump to the version.

> 2. Upgrade coordination will be rolled out in two phases. The first (v1 -> v2) will rely on a configured height to move from one version to the next. The binary will be released with a default height which can be modified later by validators in the event that it needs to be pushed back (or forward). The second phase (v2 -> v3) will use a signalling mechanism whereby validators who are now running on the latest binary will signal that they are ready to shift to the next version.

Reviewer: We could add a CLI command to modify the upgrade height. That may be more convenient for people than downloading a new binary

## Detailed Design

The design depends on a versioned state machine whereby the app version displayed in each block and agreed upon by all validators is the version that the transactions are both validated and executed against. If the celestia state machine is given a block at version 1 it will execute it with the v1 state machine if consensus provides a v2 block, all the transactions will be executed against the v2 state machine.

Given this, a node can at any time spin up a v2 binary which will immediately be able to continue validating and executing v1 blocks as if it were a v1 machine.

> The mechanism that dictates which versioned block to agree upon, begins with the app in `EndBlock` of the previous height. There, as a `VersionParams`, the application indicates the version they expect the network to have agreed upon. The proposer of the following height then proposes a block with the new app version. If a validator has the same app version and everything else is correct, they will vote for it else if they are on a different version they will PREVOTE and PRECOMMIT nil, signalling to move to the next round. If less than 2/3+ validators have upgraded, the network will be unable to reach consensus. If the upgrade has failed, then the validators that upgraded can simply downgrade and continue to produce blocks on the original version (even if they are still running the binary of the latest version).

Reviewer: They are not changing the binary but are just accepting and producing blocks of the prior version

> The mechanism that dictates which versioned block to agree upon, begins with the app in `EndBlock` of the previous height. There, as a `VersionParams`, the application indicates the version they expect the network to have agreed upon. The proposer of the following height then proposes a block with the new app version. If a validator has the same app version and everything else is correct, they will vote for it else if they are on a different version they will PREVOTE and PRECOMMIT nil, signalling to move to the next round. If less than 2/3+ validators have upgraded, the network will be unable to reach consensus. If the upgrade has failed, then the validators that upgraded can simply downgrade and continue to produce blocks on the original version (even if they are still running the binary of the latest version).

Reviewer: It could be possible to implement something whereby a node produces v2 blocks after a height but still accepts v1 blocks. I'm not sure if this is a good idea. I haven't thought it through yet

### Phase 1: Configured Upgrade Height

> The height of the upgrades will initially be coordinated via the `app.toml` config file under a seprate upgrades section. This will consist of a mapping between the height and the app version that will be loaded by the application into working memory whenever the node begins. The `upgrades` module will simply take in this map and a reference to the `ParamStore` which it can use to set the new app version at the appropriate height. For safety, users will not be able to specify an app version that is greater than what the binary supports (i.e. 10 for v8). There is no rule preventing users from specifying a downgrade to an older version or a version that skips values. For convenience to node operators, a default mapping can be included in the binary such that the node operators simply need to stop the node, download the appropriate binary and restart the node.

Reviewer 3: > a mapping between the height and the app version

Should this be a mapping of chain id -> height -> app version?

Reviewer 3: > For convenience to node operators, a default mapping can be included in the binary such that the node operators simply need to stop the node, download the appropriate binary and restart the node.

👍

Author: in the previous setup, we used chainid -> app version -> height range, but I don't think it matters too much. Height -> app version make a lot of sense. I assume the underlying representation will be the somewhat similar, presumably we index on height and check during endblock

Reviewer 3: > Height -> app version make a lot of sense. 

With this approach, how do we distinguish an upgrade height on a testnet from an upgrade height on mainnet? I expect we will encounter a scenario where we want to upgrade mocha at height A and mainnet at height B where A != B.

Author: ahh sorry, by 

> Height -> app version make a lot of sense

I was distinguishing between only that portion, where on BSR it was

> app version -> Height

you are correct, both schemas must use chain-id as a first index

Reviewer 3: Concrete proposal

```suggestion
The height of the upgrades will initially be coordinated via the `app.toml` config file under a seprate upgrades section. This will consist of a mapping from chain ID to height to app version that will be loaded by the application into working memory whenever the node begins. The `upgrades` module will simply take in this map and a reference to the `ParamStore` which it can use to set the new app version at the appropriate height. For safety, users will not be able to specify an app version that is greater than what the binary supports (i.e. 10 for v8). There is no rule preventing users from specifying a downgrade to an older version or a version that skips values. For convenience to node operators, a default mapping can be included in the binary such that the node operators simply need to stop the node, download the appropriate binary and restart the node.
```

or alternatively  "a mapping from chain ID to app version to height range"

### Phase 2: Signaled Upgrade Height

> Preconfigured upgrade paths are vulnerable to halts. There is no indication that a quorum has in fact upgraded and that when the proposer proposes the block with the latest version, that consensus will be reached. To mitigate this risk, the upgrade height can instead be signaled by validators. Vote Extensions may appear as a good tool for this but it is inefficient to continually signal every height. Validators should only need to signal once. There are two possible approaches:

Reviewer 2: > Vote Extensions may appear as a good tool for this but it is inefficient to continually signal every height.

[question] In teh Vote Extensions , would validators signal per vote?

Reviewer: Yes

> - **Off-chain**: A new p2p reactor is introduced whereby validators sign a message indicating they are now running a new binary and are ready to switch. Once a proposer has received a quorum plus some predefined grace period, they will propose a block with the new version and the rest of the network will vote accordingly. This approach means that the application doesn't have control but rather has to listen for changes in the app version. This also requires a change to the `PrivValidator` interface to be able to sign the new message.

Reviewer 2: > the rest of the network will vote accordingly

[question] Who are the voters? just consensus nodes?

Reviewer: Just the validators

Reviewer 2: As I heard that the term "validator" is sometime used interchangeably to describe nodes that primarily monitor the network and validate blocks without possessing voting power, can you please confirm whether the "validators" mentioned in this document specifically pertain to nodes with voting power or not?

Reviewer: Yes they are nodes with voting power
